---
title: "The Unforeseen Dangers of Ground-Handling Paragliders -- Fences"
author: Matt Smith
tags: [ground-handling, paraglider, safety]
description: One man's unfortunate yet amusing encounters with fences
---

# The Unforeseen Dangers of Ground-Handling Paragliders -- Fences

We all know that ground handling when conditions are dangerous is, well
dangerous, but what about when the conditions are perfect? What are the
hazards then?  The following personal incidents show that even ground
handling in perfect conditions comes with some danger, particularly for
men!

My first incident with ground handling occurred in the training paddock
on my first day of my training. I was training on a small hill, not
steep enough to really get airborne, but steep enough to get just off
the ground. The wind direction had changed resulting in the small group
of students that I was with being moved to a different part of the hill
by the instructor.

I was the first one ready and did a front launch and ran like crazy down
the slope. As you do when training, my head was down, eyes were at my
feet and not up looking at where I was heading.  Just as my wing
obtained a little lift, I realised that about 30metres in front of me
was an electric fence!

The fence couldn’t be seen clearly from the launch site, particularly as
I was looking at my feet as I started my run. It was one of those
temporary ones that consisted of a single strand of electric wire with
thin upright posts. Its really hard to stop running when one’s glider
has picked up airspeed and is lifting you off the ground, particularly
when you are inexperienced and have not really learnt the skill of a
strong flare.

Anyway, as my toes obtained a little purchase, I tried desperately to
stop and dig the rest of my feet into the ground. My little toes
screaming for soil through my boots.  I was relieved when I finally
stopped just a metre from the fence.

However, the wing now travelling at near trim speed, continued its path
over the fence in front of me and as it did so it pulled me with it.
Unfortunately the electric wire was around groin level. It was even more
unfortunate that it was ‘on’ and pulsing though it were some 15,000
volts!

I’m not well-endowed but there’s one part of the male anatomy that
protrudes just enough past one’s thighs and that was the first part of
my body to make contact with the fence. It was one of the few times I
wished I was a girl! And it was the first time I realised an electric
connection can be made through a pair of jeans!

After a few loud ‘zaps’ and what I would describe as ‘penile
unpleasantries’ I managed to get off the damned thing.  I think reflect
had a big part to play.  I’ve heard of electrical stimulation and
electric shock therapy, but in the middle of a paddock with a group of
people watching???

Needless to say the other students in the class were in fits of laughter
from watching this incident. I think the instructor was somewhat
embarrassed from not seeing the fence earlier. Apparently, as I had
taken off and begun my run down the hill he had seen the fence and
yelled madly at me to stop. Either I didn’t hear or he was just looking
for a way out!

He said the fence wasn’t there the previous day- a likely story, given
he was struggling to hold back his laughter which was evident from the
tears in his eyes.  Maybe he was thinking about the incident report!  
Mind you the tears in mine weren’t from laughing, however, it wasn’t
long before I saw the humour and no serious harm was done.

The second incident in my ground handling experience occurred in a
paddock where I now regularly practice.

When the fires of last summer devastated the place, most of the fences
were burned. A barbed-wire fence surrounded the paddock where I practice
and all the main posts were burnt off. The top wire was a little less
than waist high and easy to step over as it was also quite loose.

Anyway, one morning after spending an hour or so ground handling, I
packed up and began to walk back to the car with the glider in its pack
and the pack loosely over one shoulder. As I came to the fence and
stepped over it the loose pack on my back shifted from one side to the
other. This caused me to overbalance just as I’d put one leg over the
fence.

With the barbed wire between my legs and off-balance I again became
concerned about my anatomy. I tried to lift my leg over the fence but I
didn’t do a good job and fell over. This caused the barbed wire to get
caught between my legs and tear down my inner thigh. To make matters
worse I landed on my backside in a patch of blackberries that were
growing on the other side of the fence!

I ended the morning’s ground handling session with considerable
scratches down my leg from the barbs on the fence as well as a
considerable number of blackberry thorns in my bum! However, I’m glad to
report that the important parts of my anatomy survived once again. I did
look around nervously to see if anyone had actually seen me, thankfully
all was in the clear! 

From that day on I’ve never climbed over a fence with my paraglider pack
on my shoulder, I always take it off and lift it over any fence.
However, this simple strategy became the basis for my third experience
with paragliders and fences.

The owner of the paddock was becoming tired of stock escaping from his
paddock due to the burnt fencing, so it was replaced. The new one was
about chest high with a taut strand of barbed wire across the top, a
couple more below that with a width of rabbit-proof fencing at the
bottom. The type of fence where the gap between the lowest strand and
the rabbit-proof fencing is just wide enough to entice you to go
through, but narrow enough to catch your shirt on the barbs.  I’m sure
you know the type.

There’s no way you could get through the gap with a paraglider on your
back and even risky trying without it. 

Given my past experiences I wasn’t going to try and climb over this one
with the paraglider on my back. I thought it best to lift the paraglider
over the fence and then climb over myself.

One calm morning I headed off for my ground handling practice. I arrived
at the paddock and took my glider out of the car.

My helmet, normally in the glider bag, was in the back of the car on
this occasion. I put it on my head rather than back into the glider bag.
I walked over to the fence and lifted the glider over.

As the fence was around shoulder height I had to lift the glider over my
head, as I did the shoulder strap of the bag slid down behind my head,
and as the bag went over the fence the strap came taut under the back of
my helmet pulling my head with it over the fence.

Visualise this, if you can: A person standing on one side of a fence,
which I might add is in a very open area, with their head over the one
side of the fence with a 30kg bag hanging off their neck on the other. A
very unusual sight!  I’m most certain had my training friends been there
to witness this, they would have once again been in fits of laughter.  

Anyway, my neck was about 10cm from the top barbed strand of the fence.

I couldn’t lift the bag off my neck because it was caught around the
base of my helmet. I couldn’t lift the bag up with my hands as they were
on the other side of the fence.

I looked down at the barbs as the weight of the glider slowly pulled my
neck towards them as the muscles in my neck and back lost their
strength. I lined my neck up with a section of the fence where the barbs
were separated the widest. I didn’t think about the prospect of being
chocked on the fence but more about having the barbs skewer my neck.

Now as I think back I can see the headlines “Another paragliding
accident- man chokes after being caught on fence”!  

As the weight of the bag became heavier and my neck was slowly pulled
onto the fence I became more anxious about my predicament. I strained to
keep my neck off the fence but it got closer and closer. Just as my neck
and shoulder muscles couldn’t hold any longer, I accepted the inevitable
outcome- my jugular was about to be torn open and my life was about to
end through the blood loss, but it didn’t happen- the glider touched the
ground on the other side.  My neck was about a centimetre from the top
of the fence, the barbs just touching the skin!

Given the pressure was now released I managed to get the harness off the
back of my helmet by lowering my head a little further and slipping the
harness over the helmet. I looked around hoping no one had seen me. 
Thankfully I was again in the clear.  I now don’t wear my helmet when I
put my glider over the fence and don’t climb over it with the glider on
my back. 

In actual fact, whenever I see a fence I become a little
agitated…although I have this strange reaction when I see an electric
fence, but I won’t tell you about that.

So the moral of this story is that beware of fences, they often present
dangers that are unforeseen! Funny how I’ve blamed the fences and not
paragliding. And the next time someone says to me ‘that’s not a good
launch because of the fence’, I’ll know exactly what they mean!
